If you're an astrology junkie
(ethereal music)
you've likely seen Rick Levine's daily takes
on the homepages of Google, MySpace or AOL.
If you're not an astrology enthusiast,
this is the best way to meet Rick for the first time.
For him, the cycles of the cosmos speak much more deeply
than the simply predictions made by many astrologers.
He even goes so far as to say the predictions themselves
help manifest the reality,
which is not the purpose of astrology.
(ethereal music)
I was listening to your talk and you were telling about
a sign you have in your office which, of course,
got a good chuckle and I love,
"Exercise the illusion of freewill."
And I wanted to talk to you about that because
this whole notion about astrology,
you know, cycles of time,
fate versus freewill,
this is a huge conundrum for mankind in general.
What is it?
Well, interestingly enough it's the same conundrum
as scientists have asked or puzzled about for years.
It's the paradox of the particle wave duality.
Often people think fate or freewill.
Well, I'm old enough to remember a commercial for Certs
that was, "Is Certs a candy mint or is it
a breath mint?"
It's two mints
in one.
And, the universe is two universes in one.
Yeah.
It's a universe of particle and wave.
It's a universe of fate and freewill.
And as Werner Heisenberg discovered as we,
or as scientists in the early 20th century begin to
delve into the mysteries of the subatomic realities,
Heisenberg discovered that the subatomic particles
didn't conform to the laws of Newtonian gravitational
cause and effect.
And that, in fact,
there was an uncertainty that occurred from our perception
of these very tiny worlds--
Right.
because it would almost be,
Fred Alan Wolf talks about going into a little elf house
and to see what that's like.
Except when you're in there,
just moving your elbow breaks out a wall.
And the little elves are all running around fearful
of how big you are and whatever.
And by the same token,
when we look at the subatomic universe
we infringe this hugeness on it that alters it.
Right.
So that the observer then becomes part of what's observed
because it's not clean.
We're not looking at it,
we're interacting with it whether we know it or not.
Now, what does that have to do with fate and freewill?
When you observe it, it becomes...
Well, that's it really.
Because what happens is that in the subatomic realm
reality is propagated by waves.
Light travels as if it's a waveform.
But when we look at it,
for that moment that we go to measure it,
in the words of the physicist Fred Alan Wolf,
"The quantum wave function collapses."
He calls it a QWF,
a quantum wave function.
QWF.
Quantum wave function.
And the collapse of the quantum wave function
turns a wave for a moment of observation into a particle.
Right.
Now, what happens is that we live in
a quantum field of waves.
I can hear Deepak Chopra saying,
"We live in a world of indeterminate particles and waves
"and every--,"
you know, this whole idea of the free floating end of it.
Field of potential.
The field of potential.
"The Field."
Yeah.
Lynne McTaggart's, "The Field."
But when we talk about what's happening,
whether we're an astrologer or not,
when we talk about,
"So, how's your life going?"
At that moment you tell me a story.
Mm hmm.
And I love Muriel Rukeyser once wrote,
"The world consists of stories, not of atoms."
(chuckling)
Interesting.
But what happens when we tell a story is we take
the indeterminacy of all the possibilities of our life
and in that split second
You collapsed it
(clap)
Pop.
We've popped the quantum wave function into a particle.
Something observable.
Observable.
Exactly.
Yeah.
Now, as an astrologer,
let me just preface this by saying that
in the field of astrology,
there's a hold spectrum of perception around
fate versus freewill.
There are those astrologers who are very deeply ingrained
in the Greek Hellenistic, medieval astrology where
things are predetermined.
There are Vedic astrologers who practice Jyotisha,
which is the science of light.
Kind of like the correspondence of Ayurvedic,
which is the science of the body.
Jyotisha is the other side of the coin which is astrology,
and the two of those together mesh into, you know,
body and light or Forman light.
But most Vedic astrologers also say that
our lives are predetermined.
And that when you look at a chart,
you see that predetermination and you can ameliorate
some of the energies or work with them.
But again, it's very fated.
I believe that that sense of fatedness comes out of
the world in which that astrology was born in
a caste system where there was really no room for
personal movement or development.
It was just as it was.
You were bound by the world you were born into.
As you were in the ancient world,
as you were if you were born into 15th century England,
you never left your village.
You know, you were born into a place.
You did what you were told.
You maybe were, you know, drafted in a bar
by the English Navy and spent three or five
or eight years on a ship.
And if you were lucky, you made it back to your town,
but then you lived out your life there.
Mm hmm.
These days it's very different.
When people ask me if I believe in reincarnation I go,
"Sure. I've had several lifetimes in this body."
(chuckle)
It's very different now than it once was because
very few of us live the same life into which we were born.
So, you can say that may be fated,
but there also seems to be an element of freewill
that we have more so than our ancestors did because
we have more metaphysical mobility.
Right.
We have more
information.
So, coming back full circle to the question of
fate versus freewill,
when I look at a chart as an astrologer,
I see a pattern,
I see a picture of the energetic potential that
you have at the moment when that you were born.
You carry that throughout your life.
As long as you are living in this particular meat body
that you've chosen--
And again, potential's the operative word.
Potential is the operative word.
Unconsciously, you will take the lowest common denominator
and live out what an astrologer might consider the fate
of your chart.
Mm hmm.
But consciously, you can do anything.
Now, here's an interesting concept,
as a sailor,
if the wind is blowing this way, toward me,
and I don't know I'm doing and I get into my sailing ship,
the wind's going to blow me right
against that wall.
Right.
It's going to blow me into the rocks because
I'm at the whim of whatever which way,
whatever way the wind is blowing.
But if I'm an accomplished sailor,
doesn't matter which way the wind is blowing.
If I have wind, I can go any direction I want.
And in fact, a good sailor, by tacking,
can go faster not in the direction of the wind.
Right.
But you have to be conscious.
You have to know
how to use the wind
How to use
the energy.
the energy--
So, when you look at a chart
you can see the fated potential if there's
no conscious intervention.
But, it's not which way the wind blows that determines
the fate of the soul.
It's the intention and the consciousness.
And therefore, we do have a way not so much to overcome it,
we don't,
I still have, you know, the fate.
The Greek said there were three kinds of fate.
There was Heimarmene which is a Greek word
which means the fate of those things I can't change.
If I lift up an object
and drop it, (thump)
Right.
It's going to hit the table.
It's the fate of that object.
Right.
I live in a body, I'm gonna die.
It's the fate of this object or the physically
I'm going to die.
So, these are the things that we can't change.
The second kind of fate is Agonia.
This is the fate of not knowing.
If my eyes are closed and I'm running that way,
I'm going to hit the wall and it hurts.
Uh huh.
If I'm, you know, walking this way and
I don't see the cliff,
I'll fall off the cliff and die.
Agonia.
It's the fate of not being aware.
Mm hmm.
The third kind of fate is Pronoia.
In a way, it's the co-creation of your reality because
you can know what's coming.
Mm hmm.
Doesn't mean that you're creating the reality,
that's a bit tricky.
What it means is that you know which way
the wind is blowing,
you have a sense of how to work with it,
and therefore,
I mean real magic isn't making something happen
out of the blue,
it's taking all the forces that are currently at work
and almost like an Aikido Master,
taking them in, transforming them,
and running them through the system and
making something happen at the other end.
Mm hmm.
And so in a way,
when I look at a chart of a client or of a moment in time,
of whether it's election day or 2012 or a chart for
the bombing of the World Trade Tower
or the beginning of World War II or any chart
of any event or any person,
what I'm looking at is a bunch of points.
Planets mapped at a particular point
because I'm taking a measurement,
so the quantum wave function (clap)
is collapsed into a fated moment.
Right.
But as soon as I look away,
all those planets are moving.
They're all moving in their own speed
and their own direction.
And so, by the same token,
if you as a client come to me and I look at your chart
and I go, "Holy smokes!
"The Moon in your chart is at 23 degrees of Virgo
"and Saturn takes 30 years to go around,
"and next year Saturn's going to line up with your Moon.
"Oh my, God. You're going to get divorced."
I've just (clap) popped the quantum
wave function.
Right.
You collapse that into--
The problem--
Haven't you collapsed it into
a programmable reality?
I have and I've programmed it with my bias.
Yes, your bias.
Which is
very dangerous.
That's right.
Predictive astrology.
Predictive astrology can be very dangerous because
there's a homeopathic effect.
Yeah.
Homeopathy, as you probably know,
is the treatment of like with like.
Mm hmm.
And it takes very little energy to drive
a resonant circuit.
Right.
Which is why on crystal radio I can pick up a station
thousands of miles away because it's the
exact same frequency.
Mm hmm.
So, by the same token, in homeopathy,
the less physical substance there is in the remedy,
the stronger the remedy is if
If it's
it's the right one.
potentized.
Yes.
Potentized.
Mm hmm.
By the same token,
if I'm looking at your chart
I can deliver a homeopathic remedy by my voice.
No physical substance at all.
Right.
It's incredibly potent if it's symbolically accurate.
So, if I say something about this prediction,
you're getting divorced in a year,
you might say, "No, my marriage is great
"and everything is fine."
But there's symbolism going on
Right.
and something begins to stir in your unconscious
And it can, in fact, manifest as my prediction
because I have planted almost like a hook for
the subconscious mind to go, "That's it!"
Absolutely.
And so from that standpoint,
what I've done is I've popped your quantum wave function.
I've particularized your waveform.
Well, let's talk about those same aspects.
You see that in the chart--
Well now, we--
Now, how would you responsibly
render that information?
Perfect question and it's a large part of what my work is
not only as counseling astrologer,
but also as a teacher of other astrologers which I spend
a fair mount of my time doing.
And that is coming up with language that is not sloppy.
This is not an excuse for being a sloppy astrologer.
But the fact is the Moon is our connection to the matrix.
It's the planet of nurturing.
It's mothering.
The Moon is the mother.
Mm hmm.
The Moon is our feelings.
It's our subconscious mind.
It's our intuition.
Saturn, on the other hand, is cold and calulating
and authoritative and determined and hard.
So, when the hard energy of Saturn meets
the soft energy of the Moon,
there's often a difficulty.
We often feel out of place.
So, the question becomes,
where in your life now,
assuming that this aspect is going to be exact
in your chart in a year,
where in your life are you feeling this energy
of feeling like you're not being noticed or that
you can't breathe deeply and feel what you're feeling?
Because Saturn, authorities, structures, rules, commitments,
are in some way holding you in or restraining you.
Mm hmm.
And how can you look at those and begin a dialogue
with that part of your life, internally and externally,
so that you can begin to grow through that and like
a snake that sheds its skin,
use this transit to gain new freedom without necessarily
taking down the structures that you have.
Mm hmm.
There are times in our lives when taking down
the structures is important.
Right.
But there's also times when it's not the
smartest thing to do.
That becomes your decision.
Going back to the divorce aspect that
I was just talking about,
the question would be, how can you begin in a dialogue now
with your spouse, with your partner,
to talk about the issues that you feel are pressing on you
so that you can negotiate a way to move through it
rather than staying in denial about it.
Waiting until it's too late and coming home one day
and leaving the note on the refrigerator.
Well, and this is the real opportunity then
in understanding this clock of some kind as
movement of forces through our lives
is being able to utilize it in this way.
This sounds like a responsible use of that
movement of energies.
Well, I think so.
Yes.
I have contemporary associate astrologers who would say
that I'm shirking my duty as an astrologer.
The client wants the prediction.
Okay, now wait a minute.
Let me ask you a question.
You have,
your astrology column is on the homepage of
Google and MySpace and AOL,
that has to be fairly predictive, doesn't it?
Is that kind of like your daily bite so to speak?
Yeah, yeah--
How does that
fit in with all of this?
I write a thousand words a day.
Seven days a week.
And I've been doing it now for eight years.
It's amazing.
I have in the range of 10 to 15 million readers a day.
I know. It's just amazing.
Now,
So, now what
are you doing with that?
Well, what I do is I write about a hundred words
of what I call overview.
Mm hmm.
The overview is basically a description of the weather.
Okay.
So, I'll use a metaphor.
If I was writing a week ago about yesterday
here in San Francisco,
I might say astrologically this looks like a day of rain.
Mm hmm.
Now, if...
And then I discuss that weather through
12 different lenses.
12 archetypes, the signs.
And it's not just, you know, whatever your sign is,
you're a Scorpio, you're a Virgo,
you're a whatever.
But there's just 12 different ways to frame the universe
and we're all, all 12 signs truly.
Though unconsciously we lean towards one.
Mm hmm.
That comes back to that fate versus freewill.
When we're not paying attention,
we go to typically either our Sun sign,
the time of the year that you were born,
or some other facet of our chart.
There's a Moon sign in Mercury and Venus.
I mean it's more complicated then
just the one and 12th.
So, let's say
we're just going with say our Scorpio Sun sign.
It's calling for rain in San Francisco,
how is this going to play itself
out in my field?
Okay. So,
Is that one of--
Yes.
(chuckles)
So, here's the thing.
If you're a Leo and love the Sun,
Right.
It might not be a fun day for you because you were
planning on going to the beach.
Now, if you didn't know it was going to rain,
you'd be there at the beach with your suntan lotion going,
"Life sucks."
Mm hmm.
But if you knew it was going to rain,
you might reschedule that day and spend a day
going to the movies.
On the other hand,
if you were a water sign like a Scorpio or
a Cancer or a Pisces,
or if you were a duck,
you might go, "It's raining out.
"What a great day to go to the beach.
"No one's going to be there but me."
Mm hmm.
"I love those quiet, solemn, deep, heavy days
"at the beach.
"I don't need the damn Sun."
Mm hmm.
You see so we have different ways of reacting with
our external environment.
And so, in my daily column,
what I try to do is first describe the cosmic weather.
For example, we're coming into election day here now.
We're talking the Sunday before election day.
And we're coming into a pretty potent aspect that is
Saturn and Uranus.
Saturn, the planet of restriction that we
talked about earlier, and Uranus,
the plant of breaking through restriction.
Now, I don't know who's going to win the election.
I certainly have my biases,
but it's obvious that these two forces are standing off.
Now, for someone,
maybe a Capricorn, that is more Saturn oriented,
they may be very fearful of what could happen.
And therefore, they may pull in and constrict
and hold something like this.
And so, that day may be very difficult for them
if the world is exploding and it's not
what it's supposed to be.
On the other hand,
an Aries or an Aquarius, as an example,
may be much more interested in not the status quo,
but whatever's happening next, "Oh, this is cool.
"Things are screwed. I'm in!"
You know?
Yeah.
And so, again, what I try to do everyday is for
each of the 12 signs,
describe a possible scenario of how you might react
to what's going on and then,
and I think this is the key thing and one of the things
that makes my column substantially different than
many of the others, I always try to say,
"Here's something that you might try to do as a practice."
Mm hmm.
I don't use those words around it,
but if you read the column there's always,
I have people who write and say they love my column
and blah blah blah blah.
In the same day I'll have someone write and say,
"I hate your column. It's always so negative."
I love that because its,
and part of the thing is that I don't just write
the goodie goodie stuff,
I try to describe an energy that's difficult,
and then I try to describe how we might work
with that energy.
That's my approach.
Now, with the energies intensifying
in general these days.
The feeling that time is speeding up that life is
demanding our attention and some,
not just discretion but wisdom and so forth.
Are you finding that more people are turning to
these larger cycles and tools such as astrology?
Yeah. (laughs)
Yeah. I mean
you can tell by book sales and log ons.
No.
Is it ratcheting up?
Absolutely.
But in all honesty, it has been pretty steadily
since the 1960s.
Mm hmm.
And yet in the past 10 years it's taken another,
several leaps and there's a lot of reasons for that.
A lot of my contemporaries (burp),
excuse me, who begin seriously studying astrology
in the '60s,
I was a college student in the late '60s.
And I got into astrology through an academic degree
in psychology, through an interest in Freud
and Young and archetypal psychology,
and depth psychology.
And, as many of my contemporaries have,
I also at that time became acquainted with a lot of
the Asian Eastern philosophies and religions.
And my work in astrology, as many of my contemporaries,
have lead to a renaissance of publishing.
Today if you were to say,
"I'm interested in as in astrology,"
there would be thousands of books.
Right.
And many written by very intelligent people.
PhDs and--
True.
And deep academic books.
Books on all sorts of, you know,
whether it's economic cycles, psychological,
spiritual, historical.
I mean the amount of work out there is incredible.
In the '60s there were only like eight books.
I'm exaggerating a little bit.
"Love Signs."
(laughs)
My first book.
Yeah. No, great.
Well actually it was not "Love Signs,"
it was Linda Goodman's first book,
"Sun Signs."
Before
"Love Signs."
Right. Exactly.
And...
But the thing is that it has changed substantially.
What used to be three books on a shelf at Barnes & Noble
is now two shelves.
Right.
And so, from that standpoint not only in the
publishing world, in the print media,
you know, dead tree world.
Right.
But also on the internet.
You have just amazing growth of communities and chats
and user groups and websites of people who are
studying astrology and wanting more information
and finding that there are people, intelligent people,
all over the world.
I mean the fact is that in my professional life
I've spent time in the telecommunications industry.
I've spent time in the computer industry.
I've spent time in the natural products,
alternative medicine world.
And in the astrological world.
The reason I love being in the astrology world
is the people who are involved in it are so damn smart.
This has been my observations.
Well we have to remember kings and queens and--
Popes.
and popes.
Let's talk about popes.
Popes and muses.
Until the 15th century
Yeah.
almost every pope either was an astrologer
or employed a staff of them.
Right.
And, you know, all it takes is one trip to Europe
and going to the cathedral and seeing in the cathedrals
the signs of the zodiac on the Sistine Chapel in all of the
old cathedrals in Europe the connection between astrology
and the church is absolutely intertwined and yet
we forget about that.
Why did that get cut?
Why was that separate?
(children squealing)
The connection between the church and astrology
is really interesting because politically it's
a difficult position.
To want to be in control, the church,
and have people go to the edge of town and
talk to the astrologer and find out what's going on.
Either Jesus is the salvation or the astrologer
has the information.
Can't be both.
And in some ways, you see,
the fascinating thing is the church in none of its
writing anywhere by any real church theologian
has ever said astrology doesn't work.
They just said don't do it.
Right.
And this is very important because the "don't do it"
involves the sense of who's in control.
Is it Jesus or is it the stars?
Now, the odd thing here is I find it very peculiar
that the Lord's prayer says it's done on Earth
as it is in Heaven.
And yet no one really believes that.
(laughs)
Right. Right.
Because that's all astrology really says is that
it's done on Earth as it is in Heaven.
Right.
And so you have these people mumbling these words
every time they get together in a group and pray.
And yet, they same it the same breath
but don't use relegy.
Don't look up.
Don't look up and don't look in.
Right.
Actually James Hillman points out that one of the
insidious things about the catholic, about the church
is that if Jesus banished Hades from the hell realms,
then what it really does is it robs each and every
one of us of our hero's journey into the underworld,
into our inner worlds,
to do the work and come back with our own magic.
We don't have to do
Right.
the work 'cause he did it for us.
Very
interesting.
It's an interesting
observation.
It is an
interesting observation.
Hillman has
many observations that
are interesting.
Yeah.
But coming back to this whole thing of
church and politics,
or of the politics of church and astrology,
is that another interesting observation is that astrology
is the only thing that I know of that modern science
and the church agree on.
And that is, astrology is a blight on mankind and
the wart of astrology needs to be, you know, excised
from the body of human thought and action
for very different reason interestingly,
but they both have a lot at stake.
The church has this whole political thing at stake
of, you know, who's in control.
Interesting, the Jews, the "Talmud"
says that astrology works,
but not for the Jews.
(laughing)
Okay.
Oh yes, the short version of it.
Yeah.
But again,
it's like if you have
some intention
Still taking
this power away.
If you have some intention of a higher focus
then it's like it doesn't matter.
Gravity, you know, doesn't impact you.
But getting back to the science thing,
the problem with science and astrology is that
you can't have a system based upon repeatability.
Which is what the experimental method says that
if you drop an object,
it has to accelerate at 32 feet per second, per second
all the time.
Right.
And yet, when the Moon is full,
it functions differently then when the Moon is new,
then we have a problem in science.
And it turns out that a student of Rudolf Steiner's,
a chemist named Lili Kolisko in the '20s or '30s
did a series of experiments where she took metal salts.
Now, the ancients had a system where each
of the seven planets,
and when I use the word "planets" I use it in the
Greek sense of Sun and Moon being a wanderer just like
the other known planets.
Mm hmm.
But the seven visible planets,
Sun, Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn,
each had an association with one of what
the ancients called the seven primary metals.
Mm hmm.
So, the Sun was associated with gold.
Silver with the Moon.
Mercury with Mercury.
Copper with Venus.
Iron with Mars.
Tin with Jupiter.
Lead with Saturn.
Okay. (thump) Fine.
The fascinating thing is that these metals can all be
made into chemical compounds called salts,
like copper sulfate,
that bright green blue crystal or gold sulfite.
Or iron sulfate or so on.
Mercury chloride, et cetera.
And so, these have become liquids
because you can dissolve a salt in water.
If you take a piece of filter paper and put it into
these salt solutions,
the liquid capillary action comes up the filter paper
and then you take it out and you let it dry.
Every salt compound has a distinguishable color,
crystalline pattern that can be used to identify
what the salt is in the laboratory.
Mm hmm.
It's one of those techniques that laboratory scientists
will use to figure out what's in a compound.
Right.
The problem that Lili Kolisko discovered,
and these experiments were redone by an associate of mine
for his PhD thesis and the history of science at Cambridge
a few years ago,
incidentally this associates name is Nick Kollerstrom,
K-O-L-L-E-R-S-T-R-O-M
and you can Google this.
Okay.
What Lili Kolisko discovered is that for a few hours
every month when the planet associated with that
particular metal was aligned in conjunction with the Moon,
the cell salts or the salts would not crystallize.
They would just remain grey sludge.
Interesting.
Now, so that means that you can take copper sulfate
Yeah.
And for 28 days a month it will crystallize just as
it's supposed to,
but for about for fours before and six hours after
the alignment of Venus and the Moon,
which happens once a month,
because the Moon goes around once a month,
Venus is moving
Right.
at it's own rate.
And so once a month Venus or the Moon lines up with Venus
and the same is true with each of the different planets
and each of those different salts.
Now, this is huge because here's a
physical manifestation
Yes.
of how the movement of these planets actually change.
Perhaps blood chemistry which we know relates to emotion.
I mean it's either all connected or it isn't.
This is a clue that it may be all connected.
Now, the problem still becomes that if time is a variable
that a scientist needs to take into account,
then the experimental model is in trouble.
And everything in science is based upon on repeatability.
Like a neurotic.
Doing it again and again and again and again and again.
And a neurosis is based upon an untruth.
And therapy basically goes through the neurotic's past,
unwinds the story,
so they can be freed from their compulsive habits
or patterning.
It's my suggestion that a lot of what's happening and
what astrology and other things have to offer to science
is perhaps a retelling of the story because we,
in the age in enlightenment or as Rob Handon,
an associate of mine says,
the age of endarkenment,
(chuckle)
what happened is that we forgot that
we were connected with everything.
And so, we have a basic untruth sitting behind the
entire experimental scientific model.
John Anthony West who was an Egyptologist and
wrote a book called, "The Case for Astrology,"
he calls science the church of progress.
Yes and he's a seriously intelligent man.
I've interviewed him a
John's a good guy.
couple of times
I know John.
But he talks about how they,
that these priests of the church of progress
wear their robes,
have their jarg on,
have their belief system,
and part of their belief system is what Deepak Chopra calls
the superstition of materialism.
(laughing)
Very true.
I love that.
I do too.
Just the superstition
of materialism.
(laughing)
Oh, yes.
It's a superstition.
Yes.
Somewhere along the line,
someone believed that what we see is actually
what we get.
Yeah.
You know.
And it's just not quite that way.
There's more to
that story.
I don't remember
what your question,
but did we answer it?
And you know
what?
(laughing)
At this point, oh I was asking about church and astrology,
but I think you answered it and then we got some bonuses
in there too.
I just have a,
I have one other question that I've wondered about
in my lifetime about this whole notion,
back to the original question of
freewill versus fate.
Fate.
Rate versus freewill.
And that is,
where does the soul, the intention of the soul,
come into it?
If the soul is choosing to incarnate and has options
Mm Hmm.
as to the astrological influences,
perhaps even the Trivates incarnating into if
they do have that
Yeah.
Kind of choice.
Can't that be considered part of the freewill?
Is the very choice of those aspects in your birth
to begin with?
Yes.
Or part of the fate.
Or part of the fate. (laughs)
Depending upon where you are in the process.
Right.
You see karma basically,
which is Newton's third law which basically says
an object, well no, it basically says that
for every action there's an opposite and equal
reaction.
Right.
So, we are the result of all of our past actions.
And yet, at every given moment in time
we can't change everything,
but we can intercede in little ways.
This is the magic of yoga.
I mean what it's doing is it develops what starts off
as a very little, you know,
(inhales)
just be aware of this.
Just sit like,
anything like that,
what it does is it brings in a different habit.
Mm hmm.
And by doing that, we're actually breaking the cycles.
I mean there are many ways to break cycles.
Whether it's yoga, whether it's an exercise program,
whether it's changing your diet,
whether it's psychotherapy, whether--
I mean there's all different ways of different practices
to break patterns.
So, I used to, when I taught astrology for beginners,
in my second class I used to have what I call the
fate versus freewill discussion.
And I'd go around the room and ask everyone,
"So, what do you think? Fate or freewill?"
And during one particular class and this,
I mean I can see it as if it were yesterday.
It was probably 20 some odd years ago.
There were two women sitting next to each other
who didn't know each other.
And the first woman was probably in her late 50s then,
early 60s.
She owned a home in Seattle.
She owned a home in Sedona.
And she was a post married single woman who
was wealthy enough to go to any consciousness workshop
anywhere on the planet as she chose,
and she did.
And she'd been Course of Miracles,
she'd been to Omega and Esalen and Hollyhock, you know.
That she'd done the circuit.
She'd done the circuit.
And she said, "It's obviously freewill."
We co-create our reality.
Our reality is what we make it.
We have choices, we exercise these choices.
And so I definitely would vote on the freewill side.
The woman sitting to her left said, "I disagree.
"I personally think it's like all fate.
"I'm the mother of two teenage hemophiliac kids
"who are HIV positive because of blood transfusions.
"And this is not something that I chose or would've chose
"consciously and I think this idea of co-creating
"our universe is a bunch of hogwash.
"And as much as I live a pretty good life and clean life and
"I make the best of what I have.
"This is a tough existence that I didn't ask for
"and everyday if there's a way I could change it, I would.
"I don't get that option that you have of co-creating
"my universe."
And in that moment it dawned on me it was very simple.
The better your life is the more the ego would like
to take credit for it and think that's freewill.
(laughing)
The less good, that's not correct English.
The worst off you are, in whatever way you judge it,
the more you think that you're not in control
and something else is.
And that may be an over simplification.
But again I think that it comes back to that.
It's a spectrum and I think that some people
moving through life seem to have consistently more
apparent freewill than other people who seem not
to be able to make anything happen.
And, hold on one second,
and by the same token,
there are times in our life when anything
we think can happen.
And there are other times in our life where
it doesn't matter what we're doing, it's not happening.
And so, it's a kind of a slippery issue.
An astrology can look at some of that but
it's not a quick and easy answer.
Could that have anything to do with
the density of karma per chance?
Sure.
That's
a possibility.
The density
of karma.
You know, or who knows why.
Yeah. Yeah.
The density of karma.
Yeah.
It could have to do with the, you know,
astrology of the moment.
It could have
to do
Yeah.
with the tribe and, you know,
and the place that we've incarnated.
This whole thing about the choice of incarnation,
I'm sure that some people, you know,
read the fine print and signed on the dotted line
and said, "Here I go."
And yet, there are days when I think I was just peering
over the edge and went,
aaaghhhh!
(laughing)
Oh shit.
You know.
I don't know that it's always conscious.
I mean if you study the Tibetan "Book of the Dead"
and the Tibetans who I think probably have a better
sense of the of space between death and rebirth
and many of the other philosophies.
It's not always real conscious,
what happens in the bardo states and the states
after death
Right.
and before birth.
And yeah, sometimes I think we choose,
but sometimes I think we can slip there as much as
we can slip here.
The other thing is that even if we chose something,
even if we read the fine print,
we sign on the doted line and we're in for exactly
what we signed up for.
There's still what I call the karmic zap factor.
(chuckles) And that is, strange things can happen.
And at any given moment,
this is a concept of Dzogchen which is a branch of Buddhism
which basically says liberation and enlightenment
and ultimate change is available at any given moment
all the time to anyone.
Now, of course, the great Dzogchen masters have
studied for lifetimes.
Right.
But the fact is that it's--
Theoretically that is true though.
All there is is now.
Yeah.
There is nothing
else than now.
Granted as physical bodies we have weight from the past,
as egos we have anticipation of the future,
but it's all right now.
And so, at any given moment we are free with these
big changes that we have going on all over on planet Earth.
And you don't need to be a cosmologist or an astrologer
or even paying attention to know that there's big stuff
going on these days.
The fact is that we can doom and gloom it and
it may all go down.
Don't know. It may.
But, we also have the potential of turning
the ship around on a molecule.
That fast.
And that's what happens when the lightning
of awareness hits.
That's some of the work,
some of the reason why I'm doing what I'm doing,
what you're doing what you're doing
is because the new age, or the apocalypse does not
happen at one moment in time.
It happens to those people who are either ready
or standing in the right point or whatever it is.
When you get struck by the lightning,
that's it right then and there.
And yet, the lightning's getting bigger.
More and more people are getting struck.
And as awareness changes, you know, the phenomenon spreads
and anything, it's like being in double jeopardy,
you know, where scores can change and anything can happen.
Anything can happen.
Anyone can win.
And, we do have the right to choose how
we're going to act and react to all of it.
We have the illusion of right to choose.
Yes. Yes.
(laughing)
No. And I'm not
There's no right
taking anyway.
to choose how
we want to respond.
We can either--
Yeah, we--
We can either throw our hands up and despair
or we can--
I once saw this very wonderful Rinpoche who's actually
British born but spent 20 years in the caves and in
the Hills of Bhutan.
And his name was Nangpa Choekyi Rinpoche.
And a Nangpa is a title.
A Nangpa is an awareness master.
A word awareness I think is, word awareness master.
He called himself mantra man.
(laughing)
Okay.
And this guy was brilliant.
He's still around.
I haven't seen him for probably 15 years.
So, what says mantra man?
Well, mantra man, when someone asked,
"So what is it, fate or freewill?,"
said imagine you're walking down the street
and it's a bright sunny day and it's beautiful out
and you're whistling and you're having a good day.
And you look up to your left and on the third story
there's a couple of bricklayers doing some repair work,
and as you walk by, you put your left foot out.
And just as you do, these guys knock a brick over
(slam)
and it falls on your foot
and it breaks your foot.
And you look up and they're totally unconscious.
They don't even realize what they've done.
They're laughing, having a good time.
Your foot is hurting.
You are in deep pain and you realize that your foot
is busted and you yell up at them and say,
"Hey, you guys. Be careful."
They don't hear you.
And so, the anger begins to well up and you're yelling
at them 'cause you're in pain and they don't know it.
And you're at such a steep angle that they can't see you.
So, you step back 10 steps to get a better view.
A truck comes down the street, runs you over
and kills you.
(chuckle)
Fate or freewill?
This is what he said.
And he said, "To me it's very plain.
"The brick landing on your foot was an act of fate,
"your death was an act of freewill."
And it's exactly what you
just said
Yes.
and that is we can't control which way the wind blows.
And we can't always control the way react,
but we can learn practices to help us change
the response time and the reaction.
So, there in lies the key to making the small adjustments
at first that become more significant over time as
awareness and practice become married,
which is really what yoga is,
a combination of, you know,
yoga comes from the word "yoke" of an oxen
and has had a harness that's uncontrollable energy
by a practice of containing it enough to move it in
a direction that makes sense rather than having
the bull charge you.
On that note, thank you so much for your time.
Very entertaining as well as enlightening.
I loved your presentation today and you have a
new book coming out for 2009 that people can check out.
Also, they can go to any of these websites and
look at the dailies.
And, you're available if someone wants to
chat with you too.
So, we'll put your
website info up there.
(ethereal music)
Thank you so much, Rick.
Thank you.
(ethereal music)
For more of Rick's work,
you can find him at tarot.com and you can also
pick up a copy of, "Your Astrology Guide 2009"
through Amazon or any other major bookseller.
Meanwhile, if you're resonating with this subject,
please check out our interviews with Jessica Murray,
another astrologer who takes the wide view
of the times we're in.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(ethereal music)